---
title: "PCprophet: a framework for protein complex prediction and differential analysis using proteomic data"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-02-03-pcprophet
excerpt: 'PCprophet: a framework for protein complex prediction and differential analysis using proteomic data'
date: 2021-01-02
venue: 'Nature Methods'
paperurl: 'https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-021-01107-5'
citation: 'Fossati, A., Li, C., Uliana, F., Wendt, F., Frommelt, F., Sykacek, P., Heusel, M., Hallal, M., Bludau, I., Capraz, T., Xue, P., Song, J., Wollscheid, B., Purcell, A. W., Gstaiger, M., & Aebersold, R. (2021). PCprophet: a framework for protein complex prediction and differential analysis using proteomic data. Nature Methods. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-021-01107-5'
---
Protein complexes, macro-molecular assemblies of two or more proteins, play vital roles in numerous cellular activities and collectively determine the cellular state. Despite the availability of a range of methods for analysing protein complexes, systematic analysis of complexes under multiple conditions has remained challenging. Approaches based on biochemical fractionation of intact, native complexes and correlation of protein profiles have shown promise, for instance in the combination of size exclusion chromatography (SEC) with accurate protein quantification by SWATH/DIA-MS. However, most approaches for interpreting co-fractionation datasets to yield complex composition, abundance and rearrangements between samples depend heavily on prior evidence. We introduce PCprophet, a computational framework to identify novel protein complexes from SEC-SWATH-MS data and to characterize their changes across different experimental conditions. We demonstrate accurate prediction of protein complexes (AUC >0.99 and accuracy around 97%) via five-fold cross-validation on SEC-SWATH-MS data, show improved performance over state-of-the-art approaches on multiple annotated co-fractionation datasets, and describe a Bayesian approach to analyse altered protein-protein interactions across conditions. PCprophet is a generic computational tool consisting of modules for data pre-processing, hypothesis generation, machine-learning prediction, post-prediction processing, and differential analysis. It can be applied to any co-fractionation MS dataset, independent of separation or quantitative LC-MS workflow employed, and to support the detection and quantitative tracking of novel protein complexes and their physiological dynamics.

[Preprint available on BiorVix](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.05.06.080465v1)

Recommended citation: Fossati, A., Li, C., Uliana, F., Wendt, F., Frommelt, F., Sykacek, P., Heusel, M., Hallal, M., Bludau, I., Capraz, T., Xue, P., Song, J., Wollscheid, B., Purcell, A. W., Gstaiger, M., & Aebersold, R. (2021). PCprophet: a framework for protein complex prediction and differential analysis using proteomic data. Nature Methods. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-021-01107-5'
