---
title: "Systematic assessment of epigenetic remodeling during mammalian dosage compensation"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2019-05-24-talk-2
venue: "Life Science Swiss Proteomics Meeting"
date: 2019-05-24
location: "Montreux, Switzerland"
---

X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) is a widely conserved process that equalizes X-linked gene dosage in female organisms. This process is triggered by Xist, a long non-coding RNA that coats the X-chromosome , leading to transcriptional silencing. The spreading of Xist establishes the heterochromatin territory, via loss of euchromatin markers and then by by Polycomb-group proteins recruitment which leads to chromatin compaction. We aim to provide a comprehensive overview of nuclear protein complexes in ES cells and describe protein complexes dynamics upon XCI with the goal of better understanding the fine interplay between epigenetic modifiers during establishment and silencing chromosome-wide.We derived haploid embryonic stem cells from a mice line carrying a tetracycline inducible Xist. Isolated nuclei in both induced and not-induced condition were lysed under mild conditions and separated on a size exclusion column in 64 fractions. MS data was acquired in DDA mode and the resulting spectrums were searched using MaxQuant. 4844 protein groups were quantified with two unique peptides at 1% protein and peptide FDR.  The majority of the proteins (>80%) showed multiple elution features suggesting the presence of higher assemblies. We further, observed a coelution between the Notch co-repressor Spen specific proteoform and Polycomb Repressive Complex2 (PRC2). To confirm this novel interaction  we performed immunoprecipitation using two custom antibodies against two different region of Spen. Data confirm the role of Spen in the recruitment of  whole PRC2.We provide a novel complex-centric vision on XCI were several epigenetic modifier assemblies into functional modules to facilitate Xist-mediated silencing. Here we show that Spen interacts with PRC2 regulating its recruitment to chromatin, which lead to the assumption that Spen acts as a regulator of PRC2 stability in ES cells.
